# Usage

## Running Zalmoxis

You can directly run Zalmoxis using the command:

```console
python -m zalmoxis -c [cfgfile]
```

where `[cfgfile]` is typically the path to the default configuration file (typically `input/default.toml` from the base directory).

### Simulating Earth-like rocky exoplanets

To simulate a rocky exoplanet with Earth-like composition, configure the following parameters in the default configuration file:

```console
[AssumptionsAndInitialGuesses]
core_mass_fraction = 0.325     
inner_mantle_mass_fraction = 0 
weight_iron_fraction = 0.325         

[EOS]
choice = "Tabulated:iron/silicate"
```

This configuration models a fully differentiated two-layer planet consisting of a 32.5% iron core and a silicate mantle by mass.

### Simulating water-rich exoplanets

To simulate a water-rich planet:

```console
[InputParameter]
core_mass_fraction = 0.065
inner_mantle_mass_fraction = 0.485

[EOS]
choice = "Tabulated:water"
```

This configuration models a fully differentiated three-layer planet composed of a 6.5% iron core, a 48.5% silicate mantle, and a 45% outer water layer by mass.

## Running Zalmoxis in parallel for multiple masses

To run Zalmoxis over a range of planetary masses in parallel, you can use the `run_parallel.py` utility from the `src/tools/` directory using the command:

```console
python -m src.tools.run_parallel [choice]
```

where `[choice]` specifies the set of planetary masses to simulate. The available options are:

* `Wagner`: Simulates 7 rocky planets with masses of 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 12.5, and 15 Earth masses. This option is designed to reproduce the mass range explored in [Wagner et al., 2012](https://www.aanda.org/articles/aa/full_html/2012/05/aa18441-11/aa18441-11.html). It is physically meaningful when the configuration is set to simulate Earth-like rocky exoplanets as described above.
* `Boujibar`: Simulates rocky planets with integer masses from 1 to 10 Earth masses, corresponding to the mass range used in [Boujibar et al., 2020](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020JGRE..12506124B/abstract). This is meaningful when using the Earth-like rocky planet configuration.
* `default`: Runs simulations for planets with masses from 1 to 10 Earth masses (inclusive), in unit steps. This serves as the fallback set if no specific option is provided. 
* `SeagerEarth`: Simulates Earth-like rocky planets with masses of 1, 5, 10, and 50 Earth masses, to replicate the models in [Seager et al., 2007](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1086/521346). Use this with the Earth-like rocky planet configuration.
* `Seagerwater`: Simulates water-rich planets with masses of 1, 5, 10, and 50 Earth masses. Use this with the water-rich planet configuration.
* `custom`: Simulates 50 planets with integer masses from 1 to 50 Earth masses, ideal for generating high-resolution mass-radius curves or broader parametric sweeps.

## Zalmoxis in PROTEUS

Zalmoxis was also integrated within [PROTEUS](https://fwl-proteus.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), a modular framework designed to model the the coupled evolution of the atmospheres and interiors of rocky planets and exoplanets. Within this framework, Zalmoxis provides a self-consistent method for generating radial profiles of pressure, density, and gravity. These profiles are passed to the mantle evolution module, Aragog, which computes the long-term thermal evolution of the planet based on the initial structural state determined by Zalmoxis.

The integration is enabled by specifying Zalmoxis as the structure solver in the PROTEUS configuration file. Key inputs include the mass fractions of the core and mantle, the planetary bulk iron fraction, and the number of radial integration layers. Zalmoxis handles the structural modeling for the solid (volatile-stripped) planet, while volatile components are treated separately and reintroduced afterward to preserve consistency with the equation of state assumptions.

Note: At present, Zalmoxis does not incorporate the planet’s initial thermal state as defined and evolved within Aragog. The structural profiles generated by Zalmoxis are based purely on fixed-phase EOSs. Incorporating thermal effects into the structural solver remains an area of active development and constitutes an important direction for future work.